--- Page 1 ---

 
 
Shikha1* Dr. G. Mohana Charyulu2 
www.ignited.in 
3356 
 
 
Journal of Advances and Scholarly Researches in Allied Education 
Vol. 16, Issue No. 6, May-2019, ISSN 2230-7540 
Khushwant Singh Novel “Train to Pakistan”: 
Essential Style and Technique for Exploration of 
the Experience of Rural India 
 
Shikha1* Dr. G. Mohana Charyulu2 
1 Research Scholar, North East Frontier Technical University, Arunachal Pradesh 
2 Associate Professor, North East Frontier Technical University, Arunachal Pradesh 
Abstract – Khushwant Singh turns a tenacious eye on complex responses to such catastrophes as the 
Second World War and the wicked segment of India and Pakistan. To these occasions he brings 
objectivity and separation.; he isn't one to compliment or to romanticizc. Khushwant Singh has created a 
few books, some brief tales, analysis, and two volumes of books on the historical backdrop of the Sikhs. 
The unique kind of energy individuals, the strict and ethnic local area of Sikhs in the Punjab, gives a 
predictable string through his work. His mentality to Sikhs and Sikhism likewise delineates his 
complexity in its blend of compassion for analysis. Train to Pakistan, Khushwant Singh's first novel, 
mirrors the skepticism and savagery generated by the outrages submitted on the two sides during the 
parcel of the subcontinent among India and Pakistan in 1947. The novel is put in a town which 
Khushwant Singh calls Mano Majra arranged precisely on the Pakistan-India, line. 
Keywords – Train to Pakistan, Style, Technique, Exploration, Experience, Rural India 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - X - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
INTRODUCTION 
Khushwant Singh turns a determined eye on 
complex responses to such catastrophes as the 
Second World War and the ridiculous segment of 
India and Pakistan. To these occasions he brings 
objectivity and separation. ; he isn't one to 
compliment or to romanticizc. Khushwant Singh has 
delivered several books, some brief tales, analysis, 
and two volumes of books on the historical backdrop 
of the Sikhs. The unmistakable overflow of energy 
individuals, the strict and ethnic local area of Sikhs in 
the Punjab, gives a steady string through his work. 
His disposition to Sikhs and Sikhism additionally 
shows 
his 
complexity 
in 
its 
combination 
of 
compassion for analysis. 
Sikhism illustrates his sophistication in its 
combination of sympathy with criticism 
Train to Pakistan, Khushwant Singh's first novel, 
mirrors the criticism and savagery genereated by the 
barbarities submitted on the two sides during the 
segment of the subcontinent among India and 
Pakistan in 1947. The novel is set in a town which 
Khushwant Singh calls Mano Majra arranged 
precisely on the Pakistan-India, line. The town is a 
railroad intersection, in any case it has no political or 
military significance. Its populaces of Sikhs and 
Muslims, landowners and sharecroppers, live in 
simple comradeship. The main savagery is from 
dacoits and the clever opens with a dacoit assault 
on the town moneylender. The peaee of Mano 
Majra is before long upset by savagery on a lot 
more prominent scope. Two trainloads of ravaged 
bodies uncover to the frightened townspeople that 
the Sikhs and Hindus are being slaughtered in 
Pakistan. The Muslims of the town are gathered 
together and cleared for their own wellbeing and 
the Sikhs guarantee to care for their property. Be 
that as it may, the air of fortitude has been 
annihilated. Sikh warriors hand over the Muslims' 
property has been annihilated. Sikh warriors hand 
over the Muslim' property to dacoits; and a youthful 
Sikh aficionado arranges a vengeance strike on an 
evacuee train destined for Pakistan. 
Khushwant Singh illustrates different classes of 
Indian culture and graphs their response to the 
slaughter. The police are bad, rough and basic. 
They manage dacoity: they are powerless before 
mutual anger. The old judge llukum Chand is 
shrewd, bad and vulgar. He purchases the 
blessings of a youthful whore and heads to sleep 
smashed: he is good natured inside limits, shrewd, 
yet absolutely unequipped for enduring the tide of 
public homicide. The Sikh bhai Meet Singh 
manages everything well with the Muslims however 
does not have the self control expected to upset 

--- Page 2 ---

 
 
 
Shikha1* Dr. G. Mohana Charyulu2 
www.ignited.in 
3357 
 
 
Khushwant Singh Novel “Train to Pakistan”: Essential Style and Technique for Exploration of the 
Experience of Rural India 
the devotion of the Sikh fighters who lecture 
vengeance. 
The rail route in Train to Pakistan has especially 
fascinating and vile job. Mano Majra has the sad 
differentiation of being a railroad intersection. The 
town turns into the focal point of collective scorn just 
when the trains show up with their grievous cargoes 
of death. The railroad is a self-evident yet profoundly 
powerful image of India's misfortune. To start with 
the smooth running of trains all through the town 
recommends the smooth running of town life. 
The rail route is truth be told one of the town 
habitats, where ladies accumulate to talk and kids to 
play. Be that as it may, this harmony is upset 
appallingly toward the beginning of September when 
the "Kalyug" starts for India and Pakistan. The 
aggravation is represented by the abnormality of the 
trains and the ensuing separation of Mano Majra life. 
"Trains turned out to be less prompt than at any 
other time and a lot more began to go through 
around evening time. Every so often it appeared to 
be like the morning timer had been set for the worng 
hour". The railroads as of now not the site of quiet 
town tattle and play or illegal live. It is watched by 
Sikh warriors; the locals are kept away when the 
"apparition trains" come in. At last the rail route is to 
be the scene for the endeavored slaughter of the 
Muslims by the Sikh revengers and it is on the rail 
line that Juggut penances himself to allow the train to 
go securely through to Pakistan. 
The three focal characters, Iqbal, Juggut and Hukum 
chand address three parts of modem India: young 
extremist 
optimism 
connected 
with 
Marxist 
perspectives; the creature energy and heartiness of 
standard India; and degenerate officialdom. Each of 
the three make them thing in like manner: they are 
against the illegal intimidation of 1947. Each of the 
three are changed by the experience of viciousness. 
Iqbal tossed into jail and stripped exposed is raised 
against the real world, reality with regards to 
mankind, which he finds. He can't connect with the 
brave activity. Hukum Chand observes he is 
vulnerable to act in light of the fact that the size of 
savagery, the force of enthusiasm, bantam his small 
universe of police, pimps and whores. Just Juggut 
the man of viciousness is capable and ready to act 
gallantly. The story subsequently spins about the 
incongruity that at the time of outrageous risk just a 
dacoit can act boldly and others consciously and 
save a trainload of displaced people from slaughter. 
Juggut follows Iqbal to the gurdwara later their 
delivery. Iqbal has fallen into a plastered rest in the 
wake of convincing him-self not to do anything. 
Juggut's activities have the honorability of a person 
in an old Scottish hotshot he doesn't contend with 
Meet Singh yet asks him for "the Guru's words Meet 
Singh peruses from the Granth Sahib. One of the 
citations alludes God's command over the products 
of activity. Get Singh aggregates together the basic 
moral code of the Sikhs: If you will accomplish 
something great, the Guru will help you; ifyou will 
accomplish something awful, the Guru will hold you 
up. Assuming that you continue doing it, he will 
rebuff you till you apologize and afterward excuse 
you. 
Khushwant Singh's genuine "hero" is clearly Sabhrai. 
Like the Sikh hero Juggut of Train to Pakistan she is 
uninformed, strictly standard, a basic lady gave to 
God and her family. Alone of the Buta Singh family 
she endeavors to keep the Sikh religion alive. Putting 
her family first she evades legislative issues and 
subsequently intuitively questions Sher Singh's 
inclusion in the patriot cause. Yet, when he is at 
risk for being hanged she looks for direction from 
her religion and exhorts him that he should not 
escape even passing at the expense of double-
crossing his friends. She is instrumental in saving 
him, when her disease prompts his delivery. She 
bites the dust in the family's festival of the honor of 
a British Honor to Buta Singh. The old universe of 
straightforward loyalties and true religion passes on 
with her. The affection and regards she has won 
from the British - the Taylors - shows how a lady of 
such strength of character can connect the inlet 
among rulers and subjects. Sher Singh with his 
hypochondriac love-disdain of the British, and Buta 
Singh who is bewildered and uncomfortable in face 
of things to come of free India, are passed on to 
manage the coming issues. 
Train to Pakistan is clearly an endeavor at 
anecdotal amusement of a socio-chronicled truth of 
the parcel time frame experienced by the Punjabis' 
overall and Sikhs specifically. Mano Majra, a small 
town in Punjab on the lndo-Pak Border, is the 
district of activity. Arranged a large portion of a 
pretty far from stream Sutlej which, generally 
talking, is the Ganges of the Sikhs, Mano Majra is 
displayed as a stronghold of Sikh culture. It is clear 
from the way in which the writer decides to give the 
geology of the town as well as its demography. Its 
nearby forms in any case, Mano Majra is a 
delegate Sikh town of the Punjab. It has around 
seventy families. It is principally possessed by 
Sikhs who are viewed as a military race of 
instinctually thoughtful and strong individuals. 
Khushwant Singh portrays the human topography 
of the town. 
OBJECTIVES OF THE STUDY 
1. 
To study on Conception of God 
2. 
To study on reflects the cynicism and 
savagery generated by the atrocities 
committed on both sides during the 
partition of the subcontinent between India 
and Pakistan in 1947 

--- Page 3 ---

 
 
Shikha1* Dr. G. Mohana Charyulu2 
www.ignited.in 
3358 
 
 
Journal of Advances and Scholarly Researches in Allied Education 
Vol. 16, Issue No. 6, May-2019, ISSN 2230-7540 
 
Conception of God: 
Nanak was a severe monotheist. He wouldn't 
acknowledge any think twice about the idea of the 
solidarity 
of 
God. 
In 
this 
he 
couldn't 
help 
contradicting the Bhaktas, who notwithstanding their 
calling of monotheism, trusted in the resurrections of 
God and of his Avatars. Since God was limitless, 
contended Nanak, He was unable to kick the bucket 
to be resurrected, nor could he accept human 
structure which was liable to rot and passing. Nanak 
disliked of the love of symbols since individuals 
would in general view them as God rather than 
advantageous portrayals. Nanak accepted that God 
was sat, rather than as at and mithya. He in this way 
made God an otherworldly idea as well as put 
together standards of social conduct with respect to 
the idea. On the off chance that God is Truth, to talk 
a misrepresentation is to be corrupt. Untruthful direct 
not just damages one's neighbors; it is likewise 
skeptical. 
A decent Sikh thusly should not just accept that God 
is the one to focus on, Omnipotent and Omniscient 
Reality, yet in addition behave in such a way towards 
his kindred creatures that he doesn't hurt them : for 
harmful lead like lying cheating, sex, trespass on an 
individual or on his property, doesn't adjust to reality 
that is God. This standard is expressed completely 
by Nanak in the initial lines of his most praised 
morning supplication, the Japji, and is the mul 
mantra or the fundamental conviction of Sikhism. 
Nanak accepted that the power that was God 
couldn't be characterized in light of the fact that God 
was 'niranker'. Every one of his portrayals of God 
were 
therefore 
affirmations 
of 
a 
failure 
to 
characterize him. Nanak, who had regularly to pass 
on his family to proliferate his central goal, 
consistently 'returned to his home and resided 
among the ordinary citizens as one of them. His 
religion 
was 
for 
the 
householder, 
and 
he 
emphatically objected to monastic other-experience 
supported by good cause. "Having denied grihastha, 
why go asking at the householder entryway?". He 
inquired, "He trusted that one of (he fundamental 
essentials for the improvement of people was sadhu 
sangat, and noble lead towards one's neighbors. 
Khushwant Singh shows that he comprehends the 
creative force of restraint. At the point when the 
primary trainload of bodies shows up we are given 
no repulsive sights - hacked bodies, blood - stained 
appendages. The slaughter is seen at first just 
through the bits of hearsay and anxieties of the 
residents and later in Hukum Chand's bad dreams. 
Grisly the truth is passed on when they are 
requested to carry fuel to bum the bodies. The tmth 
is all the seriously astonishing. This is more striking 
when we see the itemized authenticity with which 
Khushwant Singh portrays Juggufs love-production 
toward the start, Hukum Chand's gathering with the 
whore, and the bmtality of jail life. 
Comparable restraint and selectivity administer 
Khushwant Singh's treatment of the disorder, 
savagery, passing which spread all over India in the 
early harvest time of 1947. Here too he recommends 
the difficulty of our always getting a handle on the 
reality of a slaughter on such a scale. Rather we 
have Hukum Chand's reviewing of the particular 
destiny of people he knew Prem Singh under the full 
concentrations eyes of his professional killers as he 
beverages and talks with Englishmen in Lahore 
passing on Faletti's lodging to stroll to his demise; 
Sundari the youthful bride assaulted by a crowd; 
Sunder Singh the Sikh conflict hero who shoots his 
significant other and youngsters to save them a 
horrendous destiny and afterward avoiding self 
destruction breaks to India. In these episodes we see 
the frightfulness of the public difficulty as well as 
the debilitating of human character and the joke 
which the brutality has made of the goals of Gandhi 
and he talks of Nehru. Criticism is blended in with 
feel sorry for. 
Casteless society: 
The Bhaktas had offered just empty talk to the ideal 
of a casteless society; Nanak found a way useful 
ways to break the horrendous hold of standing by 
beginning free local area kitchens-master ka langar 
in all places and convincing his supporters, 
regardless of their stations, to eat together. 
Nanak's compositions teem with sections regretting 
the framework and different practices which 
outgrew standing ideas, especially the thought held 
by Brahmins that even the shadow of a lower-
station man, on a spot where food was being 
cooked, made it unclean. 
What Nanak instructed was not frightening in its 
creativity. Diverse Bhaktas and Sufis had focused 
on some viewpoints in their compositions. Some 
had 
censured 
polytheism 
and 
worshipful 
admiration; some reprimanded the rank framework 
and the restraining infrastructure of the holy 
Brahmins over otherworldly matters. A large portion 
of them had discussed the central solidarity, all 
things considered, and lamented that structure and 
custom ought to have made cracks between 
individuals of various strict callings. They had made 
and sung songs in commendation of God and 
supported the affection for one's neighbors. Nanak 
alone made every one of these into one framework 
and began establishments with customs to 1 
sustain this mixed statement of faith. Likewise, 
what he said was said with absolute effortlessness 
which could be perceived by the rural just as by the 
modern. He, at the end of the day, summarized his 
message in three rules: kirt karo, nam japo, and 
caro work love and give in foundation. To that end 
the names of different holy people of the time 
elapsed into the pages of history books while that 

--- Page 4 ---

 
 
 
Shikha1* Dr. G. Mohana Charyulu2 
www.ignited.in 
3359 
 
 
Khushwant Singh Novel “Train to Pakistan”: Essential Style and Technique for Exploration of the 
Experience of Rural India 
of Nanak was kept alive by an after which increasd 
step by step. 
As significant as the strict and shared parts of 
Nanaks lecturing were the political. He was the main 
famous pioneer of the Punjab in written history. And 
surprisingly however the quantity of his real teaches 
was not maybe extremely incredible, the quantity of 
those having a place with different networks who 
gave proper respect to the ideal of "there is no 
Hindu; there is no Mussalman," was extensive. It 
was this ideal which brought forth Punjabi awareness 
and to Punjabi patriotism. 
Like Nanak, Govind Singh accepted that the 
sovereign solution for the ills of mankind was nam - a 
day to day existence of prayer. He didn't adjust the 
structure of prayer - the Adi Granth remined the 
sacred writing; his own works were never concurred 
a similar holiness. He objected to plainness and 
scorned the rank framework. His maxim was: manas 
ki jai sab ek hai pahachano - know all humanity as 
one position. Like Nanak, he accepted that the finish 
of life's excursion was the consolidating of the 
individual in God: 
As sparkles flying out of a fire 
Count on the fire from which they rise, 
As residue pouring from the earth Falls back 
upon a similar earth; 
As waves beating upon the shingle 
Subside and in the sea mins So from 
God came everything under the sun 
What's more to God return when their race is run. 
The main change Gobind got religion was to uncover 
the opposite side of the award. While Nanak had 
proliferated goodness, Gobind Singh censured evil. 
One lectured the adoration of one's neighbor, the 
other the discipline of violators. Nanak's God 
cherished his holy people; Gobind's God annihilated 
Flis adversaries. 
As the antiquarian of the Sikhs he gives out the point 
by point history of Ahmad Shah Abdali and the Sikh: 
Wazir Qamaruddin came out with a multitude of 
more than 60,0000 men to meet the trespassers. On 
March 11, 1748, the two armed forces conflicted at 
Manupur close to Sirhind. In spite of the fact that 
Wazir Qamaruddin was killed, his child Mir. Mannu, 
who assumed control over the order of the Mughal 
armed force, constrained the Afghans to resign. 
In December 1748, Abdali left Peshwar for the 
Punjab. Mannu sent hysterical requests to Delhi for 
help, however Wazir SafdarJung, who was more 
restless to see mannu out of power than to repulse 
the outsider, lied and mannu needed to confront the 
Afghans with anything powers he might assemble. 
Mannu halted the attacking armed force pn the 
banks of the Chenab four miles east of Wazirabad. 
Abadli wondered whether or not to open threats with 
the one who had beaten him just nine months 
sooner. Then, at that point, he understood that 
assuming he let the cold weather days by, the late 
spring's hotness would turn the chances against his 
mountain climbers. He kept the main part of his 
military with him, confronting Mir Mannu, while a 
segment under General Jahan Khan by passed 
Mamiu's powers and made for Lahore. The Sikhs 
got data that while Mir Mannu was confronting 
Abdali on the Chenab, Mannu's delegate in Lahore 
had left the city unguarded to check the high level 
of Jahan Khan. They plunged down on Lahore and 
for certain hours Nawab Kapur Singh had the joy of 
showing the capital at his leniency. He emptied the 
city when he heard of the return of the lead 
representative. 
The thankful mannu gave Kaura mal the title of 
Maharajah Bahadur and made him legislative head 
of Multan. The dewan, who felt that he owed his 
prosperity to Sikh cooperation, stored the misldars 
with favors. He held numerous Sikhs in help and 
allocated the income of twelve towns to the 
Harimandir. 
―Ranjit Singh wondered whether or not to accept 
the proper title of Maharajah, for he wished to 
abstain from doing anything which would give 
different bosses cause to contrive against him. 
Steadily, he reached the resolution that the upsides 
of contributing a set up truth with a legitimate title 
would offset the risk of stimulating the antagonism 
of the primitive nobility. The move would without a 
doubt be famous with the majority, who had not a 
ruler and their very own administration for a long 
time. It would incite different Punjabis who were not 
yet residents of the new state to perceive the 
impulses of language and a typical lifestyle, and 
put their support behind the country. The adjoining 
powers which were projecting greedy looks on the 
Punjab would likewise become used to the 
possibility that individuals of the Punjab were one 
individuals and Ranjit Singh was their ruler. On the 
first of Baisakh 1801, Sahib Singh Bedi wiped 
Ranjit Singh's temple with saffron glue and 
announced him Maharajah of the Punjab. An 
imperial salute was terminated from the post. In the 
early evening the youthful Maharaja rode on his 
elephant, showering gold and silver coins on glad 
hordes of his subjects. In the evening, every one of 
the homes of the city were lit up.‖ 
CONCLUSION 
Khushwant Singh starts the narrative of the Sikhs 
by illustrating the topographical, social, ethnic, 

--- Page 5 ---

 
 
Shikha1* Dr. G. Mohana Charyulu2 
www.ignited.in 
3360 
 
 
Journal of Advances and Scholarly Researches in Allied Education 
Vol. 16, Issue No. 6, May-2019, ISSN 2230-7540 
strict, and political foundation of their country, the 
Punjab. At the hour of the Aryan flood into the 
Punjab, there were seven streams, with the goal that 
the area was named Sapta Sindhua, or the place 
that is known for the Seven Seas. The Saraswati 
evaporated, the Indus was avoided from the area; 
and the leftover five waterways prompted the naming 
of the locale as the Punjab, a place that is known for 
extraordinary vestige. It was the support of Harappan 
human advancement which prospered between 2500 
B.C. furthermore 1500 B.C. Kurukshetra, the popular 
site of the fight between the Kauravas and 
Pandavas, was arranged in the Punjab. It was 
likewise where Lord Kxishna gave the world-
renowned message of the Bhagavada Gita. This 
district was known as Madra Desh, named after 
Madri, the mother of the Pandavas. The creation of 
the Rig - Veda, the most old of the sacrosanct texts 
of Hinduism, is related with the land of the Five 
Rivers. Khushwant Singh presents a far reaching 
record of the causes and results of the introduction of 
the Singh religion under the devout and dynamic 
profound authority of Guru Nanak, who established 
this new confidence with sights set on an 
amalgamation between antiquated Hindu religion 
and the recently propelling confidence of Islam. 
Khushwant Singh turns a persistent eye on complex 
responses to such catastrophes as the Second 
World War and the ridiculous parcel of India and 
Pakistan. To these occasions he brings objectivity 
and separation.; he isn't one to compliment or to 
romanticizc. Khushwant Singh has created two or 
three books, some brief tales, analysis, and two 
volumes of books on the historical backdrop of the 
Sikhs. The life of his own kin, the strict and ethnic 
local area of Sikhs in the Punjab, gives a steady 
string through his work. His demean or to Sikhs and 
Sikhism likewise shows his refinement in its 
combination of sympathy with analysis 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Singh, Khushwant: Jupji- The Sikh Morning 
Prayer. London: Probsthaein, 1954. 
[2] 
Singh, Khushwant: Train to Pakistan, Delhi: 
Ravi Dayal, Publishers, 1992.Firstpub. 1956. 
[3] 
Bergonzi, B: Contemporary Novelists, ed. 
lames 
Vinsion. 
London: 
Macmillan 
Publishers, 1982. 
[4] 
Burgess, A: The Novel Now. London: Faber 
and Faber, 1972. 
[5] 
Connor, F.G: The Lonely Voice: A Study of 
Short Story. London: 1963 
[6] 
Desai, S.K.: Indian Writing in English:, The 
Predicament of Marginality. The Indian 
Journal of English Studies, vol. xxvi, 1987. 
[7] 
Enright, D.J. and Chickera, E.D.: (eds): 
English 
Critical 
Texts. 
Delhi: 
Oxford 
University Press, 1979. 
[8] 
Gill, H.S. Ashes and Petals. Bombay: Asia 
Publishing House, 1978. 
[9] 
Hemenway, Stephan: The Novel of India. 
Vol. I & n. Calcutta: Writers Workshop, 1975. 
[10] 
James, Henry: The Art of Fiction and Other 
Essay, (ed.) Morris Roberts. New York: 
1948. 
[11] 
Kettle, A: An Introduction to the English 
Novel. V 01. 1.Delhi: B.l. Publishers, 1971. 
[12] 
Malgonkar, M: A Bend in the Ganges, New 
Delhi: Orient Paperbacks, 1964. 
[13] 
Mehta, P.P: Indo-Anglian Fiction. Bareilly: 
Prakash Book Depot, 1968. 
[14] 
Narayan, RK: Swami and Friends, Mysore: 
Indian Thought Publications, 1987. 
[15] 
Ravenscroft, A: A Guide to Twentieth 
Century Literature in English. London: 
1983. 
 
Corresponding Author 
Shikha* 
Research Scholar, North East Frontier Technical 
University, Arunachal Pradesh