

[PAGE_BREAK: 1]

STUDY OF PARTITION IN TRAIN TO PAKISTAN (1956) AND
A BEND IN THE GANGES (1965)
Priyanka Gupta
Research Scholar,
SMVDU, Katra,
(J&K)
The historiography of the partition of the subcontinent results into the creation of many
different facets of the society. The society at the time and before the time of partition faced the
innumerable losses. The indelible marks on the face of society were not easily removed. All the
historical events had a deeper influence on the minds of the people, writers and of the society.
The proposed partition of the country left it to witness the upheaval of unimaginable proportions
on the eve of independence. The communal riots engulfed the country.
Most of the freedom fighters tried to restore the communal peace and normalcy. Gandhi
did his best to restore the peace of the country through non-violence. Gandhi’s non-cooperation
movement (1920-22), Civil Disobedience Movement (1930) and Quit India Movement (1942)
were based on Satyagraha. Many novelists tried to bring out the issue of the freedom fight in
their works. They write about the literature of the society and the country. The writers were
meant to portray the real picture of the society. And that is what they exactly had done. The
ambit of the writers was successfully accomplished with the society. R. K Narayan’s Waiting for
Mahatma also mentioned about the partition of the country. And the protagonist Sriram, listened
to Gandhi’s speech attentively. The Mahatma pleaded for change of heart and for the freedom
from all bitterness before one could ask the Britishers to go away:
‘…I want you really to make sure of a change in your hearts
before you ever think of asking the British to leave the shores
of India. It’s all very well for you to take up the cry and
create uproar. But that’s not enough. I want you to clear your
hearts and minds and make certain that only love resides
there, and there is no residue of bitterness for past history.
Only then can you say to British, ‘please leave this country to
be managed or mismanaged by us, that’s purely our own
business, and come back any time you like as our friend and
distinguished guest, not as our rulers, you will find John Bull
packing his suit case. But be sure you have in your heart love
and not bitterness. (19-20)
In response to the elisions and occlusions of disciplinary practices whose subject is the
community and the nation, and in order to tell the story of the ambivalence of secular
nationalism, of the complexities of desires and identification that engendered sexual violence
against women, of the violence done to the male bodies during the undeclared civil war that was
partition. Scholars like Veena Das, Urvashi Butalia, Ritu Menon, and Kamla Bhasin have
variously addressed the problem of communal violence; while das has examined Sikh women
Experiences in 1984 anti-Sikh riots; Butalia, Menon and Bhasin have taken up the relationship
Vol. 2 Issue IV November, 2014

[PAGE_BREAK: 2]

between communalism and nationality and the elision of partition violence by focusing largely
on the experiences of women and children during partition.
The present paper aims at the detailed study of the two partition novels selected for the
study. The study of both the novels Train to Pakistan (1956) and A Bend in the Ganges (1965)
reveals the colonial rule and the complete subjugation of the people. Such cultural texts reveal as
well as critique the varied forms of violence that inhabit and measure the distance between the
nation and the individual, history and memory, making visible in the process as well as in the
process of production as well as destruction of the gendered subjectivities, belongings and
identities- ethnic and national.
Both the partition novels deal with the tragic theme of the partition of India and also the
untold travails of the partition. The novel is the outcome of the cause of the communal fights.
The novels are the eventual product for the society and that is what Khushwant Singh and
Manohar Malgonkar expressed in their novels Train to Pakistan (1956) and A Bend in the
Ganges (1965). Realistic portrayal aims at a reportorial account of the experiences of
individuals, whereas the Indian tradition of the epic thrives on epic similes, ornamental language,
conceit and hyperbole.
The two partition novels hinted at the traumatic partition and moreover the gendered
persecution in the novels. Khushwant Singh’s novel Train to Pakistan (1956) was also adapted
into the movie. The novel negotiates the tension between history, whose subject is the nation,
and memory, whose subject is the individual, to articulate an imaginative resolution of the
contradiction of the postcolonial freedom and dispossession, national and independence and a
deathly failure of homeliness. The present chapter discuss about the ongoing riots during the
time of the partition and moreover, all the incidents and events that happened at this time.
Khushwant Singh was a real man who belongs to the genre of writings. Before writing
novels he wrote many short stories and articles for the newspapers. The writer has attained an
international reputation among the other distinguished writers. He wrote a number of books and
his Train to Pakistan (1956) was highly acclaimed worldwide. His realistic portrayal of the
events and the lucid style of posing socio- political factors made his appraisal high. The award to
him of the grove press India Fiction Prize in 1956 for his novel Mano Majra (Train to Pakistan)
made him internationally known. Writing was his passion and moreover, the exploration of all
the simple style was ultimately made him a renowned personality.
Khushwant Singh’s mind and personality was molded by the western ideology but still he
was a true Sikh at his heart. The different themes, settings and the exploration lead him to write
the novel. The experiences of his childhood, his Punjabi culture and all other heading lead him to
search for the identity. The writer’s exploration of the rural India is the basic fact of his creative
endeavor. The portrayal of the events and the incidents in the novel made the novel more
powerful and rural. The whole set up of the novel clearly explains the division of the country.
The moving migrants with all their belongings set up the desolate image of the partition.
The novel pictures the brutal, realistic story of political hatred and of mass passions
during, the tragic days of the black days of the partition. It was really bad when human values
were killed by the demons of the communal violence. The people of the opposite communities
were transformed into rogues who merely worked for spreading communal fights only. They
merely act as an active catalyst in the freedom fight. The story of the novel revolves around the
freedom struggle. Moreover, the title of the novel hints at the reason of chaos which began in the
novel. The predominant fact of the novel is the stark realism, expository portrayal of the
Vol. 2 Issue IV November, 2014

[PAGE_BREAK: 3]

characters and the events of the tragic separation of the contemporary Indian history, partition.
All the characters in the novel were really presented as desolate people, who suffer not only from
the inhumane treatment but the ghastly sacrifice of the people for their nation.
Khushwant Singh was the man with lot of talent in his hand. He was among the best
known writers of the world who made his own place in national as well as international writings.
He was the winner of several national and international awards. The novel Train to Pakistan was
originally entitled as Mano Majra (1956) but then it was changed to former one. The title of the
novel was symbolic in its nature and matter. As the novel, explicitly manages to represent the
political and socio-economic status of the country. Khushwant Singh was himself a witness of
this cataclysmic event.
The novel Train to Pakistan is both a symbolic and political novel. The train is itself a
symbol, of movement, of the mass exodus of people. When we talk of partition we can
immediately get all the inferences and images of the trains fully loaded with people. The train
has other connotations as it can be represented in other multitudes of people who are heading for
other safer destinations. On the partition of the sub-continent, most of the people headed to
migration from India to Pakistan and vice-versa. So the train carries the significance of carrying
people of different communities and religion in one way. All the diverse religions were varied in
the train, which carries millions of people who seek for refuge and safety.
The novelist main motive in the novel is to hint at the aspect of partition and communal
riots. My area of research explores the study of partition from the feminist perspective. The
novel is divided into four parts; Dacoity, Kalyug, Mano Majra and Karma. The novel’s sequence
can be ultimately experienced right from the beginning of the novel in which Singh states;
Muslims said the Hindus had planned and started the killing.
According to the Hindus, the Muslims were to blame. The fact is,
both sides killed. Both shot and stabbed and speared and
clubbed. Both tortured. Both raped. (1)
The incidents of the novel were ultimately revolves around the two main male characters;
one is Juggut Badmash and the other is magistrate Hukum Chand. They both were corrupt people
who had a strong lust for the women and who always search for the opportunity. The novel was
filled with the catastrophic events right from the start, by the murder of the village moneylender
Ram Lal, and the suspect Jugga badmash. Jugga was a very clever rogue and a Sikh. He loves
the Muslim girl Nooran. He was under the spell of this beautiful girl, Nooran. He could not resist
himself from staying away that night and went to her place. By some trick he reached at her
place. Then the sensuous images arose were really erotic. As the novelist was known for his bold
words, he defines the scene as following:
Juggut Singh’s caresses became lustful. His hand strayed
from the girl’s face to her breasts and her waist…her
other arm was already under him. She was defenseless.
(14)
Juggut Singh was in deep love with that Muslim girl and he frequently visits her place.
The religion dominant was also one of the themes of the novel. The Hindu- Muslim- Sikh
religion was dominated the idea of the novel. Romance and communal frenzy goes with hand in
hand. The love affair of the village rogue was the matter of talk for all the people. He shows her
love to Nooran violently. He thinks that he can also control her like the whole village.
Vol. 2 Issue IV November, 2014

[PAGE_BREAK: 4]

She could not struggle against Juggut Singh’s brute force. She
did not particularly want to… she pushed Juggut Singh away.
He lay down beside her. (15)
The women psyche was completely reflected in the novel. The women always were
raped, mutilated and killed. The atrocities against the women sex were very much gruesome.
Urvashi Butalia in her work The Other Side of Silence Voices from the Partition of India says;
Mass scale migration, death, destruction, loss- no matter how
inevitable partition seemed no one could have foreseen the
scale and ferocity of bloodshed and enmity it unleashed. Still
less could anyone have foreseen that women would become so
significant, so central and indeed so problematic.
(188)
Almost at the same time Hukum Chand, the divisional Commissioner, who has arrived
earlier at the same time was busy with a teenaged prostitute, Haseena. The lust of these two
people was increased with the rapidity of the time. The novel is full of these small instances,
where we can find that men escaped and find alone time with their female partners. Singh tried in
her effort to bring out the matter of women victimization, but he was not able to make it out in
this novel. Though women were not much highlighted in partition, but the eminent scholars like
Urvashi Butalia, Ritu Menon and Kamla Bhasin have worked out and made a comprehensive
study. Butalia in her book The other side of Silence says;
In each of these instances, partition stories and memories
were used selectively by the aggressors: Militant Hindus
were mobilized using the one sided argument that Muslims
had killed Hindus at Partition, they had raped Hindu women,
and so they must in turn be killed, and their women
subjected to rape. (7)
The present paper aims at the study of partition facts with respect to feminism, in the
selected two novels; Train to Pakistan (1956) and A Bend in the Ganges (1965). Manohar
Malgonkar was born in 1913 in a royal family. He was born when India was struggling for its
freedom from the rule of the Britishers. While growing up, he witnessed many historical events.
All the political events had a great influence in the writings of Malgonkar. He himself witnessed
Civil Disobedience Movement and Jallianwalla Bagh massacre, which left indelible mark on his
mind.
The novel is set in the pre-independence days, before the onset of freedom. He in his
novel depicts the violence and communal fights that occurred at the time of the partition. The
novel also aimed at the violence and non-violence followers of Gandhiji. The three central
characters of the novel; Debi, Gian and Sundari like all others were the young people who were
affected by the freedom struggle and who involve themselves in the struggle.
The novel A Bend in the Ganges poses the two groups in the novel. One is the follower
and other one is non follower of non-violence. Malgonkar takes an objective view of the
turbulent years of struggle and independence and resolutely stands outside the subject examine
these conflicting ideologies of non-violence. A novel written at the time of partition and that
without bloodshed and mass killings was not possible. The novel opens with the message to
boycott British goods. The freedom struggle starts with the onset of sense of fight among the
natives and to do that they need to boycott all the foreign materials. The people of the village
burn all their British materials in order to oppose them. They say;
Vol. 2 Issue IV November, 2014

[PAGE_BREAK: 5]

Let them come forward; bring their hats and coats and shirts and ties, to
add fuel to this fire…Boycott British goods! That is the message. (2)
After reading some pages we got an idea that freedom struggle was not easily achieved it
was on the cost of lives of our freedom fighters. Malgonkar is best known for blending the
history with fiction and that too with references. The women role in the novel was not much but,
still there is one main character, Sundari who is portrayed as a very strong girl. The women
victimization and subjugation is not significantly portrayed, but somehow there were instances in
the novel, so that we can easily find out the women’s dual suppression. The incident of the novel
was really very forceful, where Debi’s mother was raped by a soldier and he saved her mother.
He witnessed there, ‘a blind rage had swept over him. He jumped off his bicycle and hurled
himself at the man’ (54). The partition changed the life of many people. Rapes and prostitution
was the common practices. Girls and women were sent to brothels and also they were forced to
change their identity. The women were the worst sufferers of the partition.
The later part of the novel explains the other oppression against women. The incident of
throwing acid on the face of the women was really pitiable. The protestors think that this is the
best method to humiliate people by insulting their women. The partition of the sub-continent not
only divided the people but also rise the demons in them, which ultimately lead to the doom of
humanity.
Someone threw acid at her face- an electric bulb filled with sulphuric
acid. That is the standard weapon of the Hindu-Muslim riots, don’t
you know? That is what has happened to the face of India- the
mutilation of a race conflict. (245)
There were other instances of the women suppression and their sexual harassment in the
novel. The main concern in the novel was to study the reasons of partition and the other aspects
of partition. Malgonkar chooses his characters with force and extols their passions and principles
to develop a coherent creation that is captivating and yet completely convincing. The essence is
to authenticate the happenings and events and weave them into the fabric of strong and forceful
narration. Malgonkar in his work himself says;
For every Hindu that had to die, five will die because of the way
the doctrine of non- violence has caught on. More women will be
raped, abducted, children slaughtered, because their men will have
been made incapable of standing up for themselves. (247)
Love was not at all exist in the world of Malgonkar. He says that the people were
completely transformed into communal fighters. The women were earlier treated as goddess, but
during the time of the partition they were changed into devils. Men of all communities were
involved in the business of selling and buying girls. Malgonkar catches the reader's attention by
his true depiction of the political situation and the portrayal of the human relationships that
developed in this situation.
Thus, in the study of the two novels, it is revealed that women were brutalized and
sexually maltreated. The portrayal of the violent picture in the novels shows how the childhood
memories affect and change his personality. In a review of A bend in the Ganges R.T. Robertson
in Richmond News Leader in 1965 comments on the ending of the novel and says;
Although the action and the author’s comments seem throughout to
depreciate Gian and elevate Debi Dayal, the conclusion appears to
point to a gigantic irony-or to the suggestion that modern India was
made by heroes like Debi Dayal and consists of a nation of Gians.
Vol. 2 Issue IV November, 2014

[PAGE_BREAK: 6]

Working bibliography:
Primary sources:
1) Malgonkar, Manohar. A Bend in the Ganges. Roli books: New Delhi. 2009. Print.
2) Singh, Khushwant. Train to Pakistan. Ravi Dayal Publisher: Akash Press, New Delhi.
2007. Print.
Secondary sources:
1) Bruschi, Isabella. Partition in Fiction Gendered Perspectives. Atlantic Publishers: New
Delhi. 2010. Print.
2) Butalia,Urvashi. The Other Side of Silence Voices from the Partition of India. Repro
India Ltd. Navi Mumbai. 1998. Print.
3) Daiya, Kavita. Violent Belongings Partition, Gender, and National Culture in
Postcolonial India Yoda Press. Temple University.2008. Print.
4) Fazilla- Yacoobali Zamindar, Vazira. The Long Partition and the Making of Modern
South Asia. Refugees, Boundaries, Histories. Penguin Books: New Delhi. 2008. Print.
5) Lapierre, Dominique and Larry Collins. Freedom at Midnight. Vikas Publishing House:
New Delhi. 2007. Print.
6) Lerner,Gerda. The Majority Finds Its Past, P. 178. Print.
7) Menon, Ritu and Kamla Bhasin. Borders and Boundaries Women in India’s Partition.
Printed at De Unique, New Delhi.2011. Print.
8) Scott, Joan Wallach. "Women's History and the Rewriting of History" in Christie
Farnham (ed.), The Impact of Feminist Research in the Academy (Bloomington: Indiana
University Press, 1987), P. 36. Print.
9) Sharma, K. K. and B. K. Johri. The Partition in Indian English Novels. Vimal Prakashan:
New Delhi. 1984. Print.
10) Shaikh, Firoz A. Partition a Human Tragedy IST Edition Sarup Book Publishers. 2009.
Print.
Web Sources:
1) http://shodh.inflibnet.ac.in:8080/jspui/bitstream/123456789/751/3/03_literatur
review.pdf.
2) file:///C:/AnAndrocentricandGynocentricPerspectivofWomenasVictimsinPartitio...EBS
COhost.htm#db=qoh&AN=73528658
3) http://www.academia.edu/4708846/Looking_at_Partition_through_Tamas
4) http://science.jrank.org/pages/11657/Women-S-Studies-Theories-Assumptions.html
Vol. 2 Issue IV November, 2014